###### An Audit Report on
# Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, a
 Managed Care Organization

## June 2021
###### Report No. 21-025

[State Auditor’s Office reports are available on the Internet at http://www.sao.texas.gov/.](http://www.sao.texas.gov/)


-----

**_An Audit Report on_**
### Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, a Managed Care Organization

SAO Report No. 21-025

June 2021


##### Overall Conclusion 

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (Health
Plan) accurately reported medical,
administrative, and quality improvement
expenses in its fiscal year 2018 financial
statistical reports (FSRs). However, the
Health Plan’s processes and controls were
not sufficient to ensure that reported
pharmacy expenses reflected the final
amount retained by pharmacy providers.

The Health Plan reported $26.4 million
paid to pharmacy providers in its fiscal
year 2018 STAR Kids FSRs. However, that
amount did not reflect the final cost of
pharmacy services because it did not
include funds that the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager calculated the pharmacy must
return post payment (see text box for more
information about the post-payment return
of funds). Any inaccuracies may impact the
State’s long-term Medicaid costs because
the Health and Human Services Commission
(Commission) uses that reported
information to set the monthly amount
that Managed Care Organizations (MCOs)
are paid per member (known as the
premium or capitation rate).

In addition, according to the Commission,
the Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s year end
aggregation process, which may require a
pharmacy to return funds post-payment, is
an unallowable practice. That process was
the result of an “effective rate” contract
between the Health Plan’s Pharmacy
Benefit Manager and a pharmacy provider.
This methodology reduces price
transparency and makes it more difficult to
validate what a pharmacy was ultimately
paid for an individual Texas Medicaid
claim.


**Background Information**

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (Health Plan)
provides the Medicaid STAR, CHIP, and STAR
Kids programs to two service areas: Travis and
Medicaid Rural Service Area - Central (see
Appendix 4 for additional information on those
service delivery areas). From September 1,
2017, through August 31, 2018, the Health Plan
received payments from the Health and Human
Services Commission (Commission) for the STAR
Kids program that totaled $149 million.
Approximately $143 million (96 percent) of that
funding paid for medical and prescription drug
services for 9,963 people enrolled in the STAR
Kids program. The STAR Kids program serves
members age 20 and younger with a disability.

Source: The Commission.


**Financial Statistical Reports (FSRs)**

The Health and Human Services Commission
(Commission) receives FSRs from managed care
organizations (MCOs) quarterly and annually.
Those reports are the primary statements of
financial results that the MCOs submit to the
Commission. The reports provide (1) the basis
for calculating the amount an MCO may owe
the State through the experience rebate
profit-sharing requirement (see Appendices 5
and 6 for information on the experience
rebate) and (2) a key source of claims and
administrative expense information used to set
the premiums paid to MCOs.

**Post-payment Return of Funds**

One contract tested established a mechanism
for determining a “reconciliation amount,”
which is based on an analysis of aggregated
claims. For the time period audited, this
methodology resulted in the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager calculating that the pharmacy
provider must return funds already disbursed.

There may be other circumstances in which
the return of funds by a pharmacy may be
allowable. However, for purposes of this
report, “returned funds” refers to the funds
the pharmacy was required to return to the
Pharmacy Benefit Manager as a result of the
year end aggregation process established in an
“effective rate” contract.

Sources: The Commission and the Pharmacy
Benefit Manager’s contract with a selected
pharmacy.


_This audit was conducted in accordance with Texas Government Code, Section 321.013._

_F_ _i f_ _i_ _di_ _hi_ _l_ _L_ _G df_ _A di M_ _Li_ _C lli_ _Fi_ _A_ _i_ _S_


-----

Table 1


_Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, a Managed Care Organization_

_SAO Report No. 21-025_

The Health Plan complied with eligibility requirements for pharmacy claims;
however, it should strengthen its processes for reporting claims for certain drug
types.

The Health Plan accurately reported administrative and quality improvement
expenses totaling $49.1 million and medical (fee-for-service) expenses of $109.1
million. In addition, the Health Plan paid medical claims to eligible members.

Table 1 presents a summary of the findings in this report and the related issue
rating. (See Appendix 2 for more information about the issue rating classifications
and descriptions.)

**Summary of Chapters/Subchapters and Related Issue Ratings**

**Title** **Issue Rating [a]**

The Health Plan’s $26.4 Million in Reported Pharmacy Expenses Did Not Reflect **Priority**
the Final Amount Paid to Pharmacies

The Health Plan Paid Pharmacy Claims for Eligible Members Only; However, It Medium
Should Strengthen Its Reporting of Claims for Certain Drug Types

The Health Plan Accurately Reported Its STAR Kids Medical Expenses Low

The Health Plan Accurately Reported Administrative and Quality Improvement Low
Expenses

a A chapter/subchapter is rated Priority if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could critically affect the
audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Immediate action is required to address the noted
concern and reduce risks to the audited entity.

A chapter/subchapter is rated High if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could substantially affect the
audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Prompt action is essential to address the noted
concern and reduce risks to the audited entity.

A chapter/subchapter is rated Medium if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could moderately affect the
audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Action is needed to address the noted concern and
reduce risks to a more desirable level.

A chapter/subchapter is rated Low if the audit identified strengths that support the audited entity’s ability to administer the
program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do not present significant risks or effects that would negatively affect the audited
entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited.

Auditors communicated other, less significant issues separately in writing to Health
Plan management.

|Summary of Chapters/Subchapters and Related Issue Ratings|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Chapter/ Subchapter|Title|a Issue Rating|
|1-A|The Health Plan’s $26.4 Million in Reported Pharmacy Expenses Did Not Reflect the Final Amount Paid to Pharmacies|Priority|
|1-B|The Health Plan Paid Pharmacy Claims for Eligible Members Only; However, It Should Strengthen Its Reporting of Claims for Certain Drug Types|Medium|
|2|The Health Plan Accurately Reported Its STAR Kids Medical Expenses|Low|
|3|The Health Plan Accurately Reported Administrative and Quality Improvement Expenses|Low|
|a A chapter/subchapter is rated Priority if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could critically affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Immediate action is required to address the noted concern and reduce risks to the audited entity. A chapter/subchapter is rated High if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could substantially affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Prompt action is essential to address the noted concern and reduce risks to the audited entity. A chapter/subchapter is rated Medium if the issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could moderately affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Action is needed to address the noted concern and reduce risks to a more desirable level. A chapter/subchapter is rated Low if the audit identified strengths that support the audited entity’s ability to administer the program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do not present significant risks or effects that would negatively affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited.

-----

_Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, a Managed Care Organization_

_SAO Report No. 21-025_

##### Key Points

**The $26.4 million in pharmacy expenses that the Health Plan reported in its fiscal**
**year 2018 FSR did not reflect the final amount paid to the pharmacy providers.**

While the $26.4 million represents what was initially paid to pharmacy providers, it
did not reflect the final amount retained by pharmacies because it did not include
the impact of funds a pharmacy was required to return to the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager. That return effectively reduced what the Pharmacy Benefit Manager
paid for ingredient and dispensing costs. In addition, the encounter data reported
by the Health Plan did not include any returned funds.

**According to the Commission, the Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s process to require a**
**pharmacy to return funds is an unallowable practice.**

For one contract tested, the Pharmacy Benefit Manager calculated the amount of
funds to return using an analysis that aggregated Medicaid claims with claims from
non-Medicaid programs. In addition, it is the Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s practice
to require a pharmacy provider to return funds post payment. Both of those
practices are unallowable, according to the Commission.

**The return of funds resulted from an “effective rate” contract.**

The payment methodology established in that contract between the Pharmacy
Benefit Manager and the pharmacy provider does not comply with the
requirements in the Commission’s contract with the Health Plan.

**The Health Plan paid medical and pharmacy claims for eligible members.**

The Health Plan paid medical and pharmacy claims for members the Commission
determined to be eligible for the STAR Kids program. In addition, the Health Plan
accurately reported its STAR Kids medical (fee-for-service) expenses, totaling
$109.1 million, on its fiscal year 2018 FSRs and in its encounter data submitted to
the Commission.

**The Health Plan accurately reported administrative expenses.**

The Health Plan accurately reported administrative and quality improvement
expenses totaling $49.1 million in its fiscal year 2018 FSRs. Information in the
Health Plan’s accounting system supported the reported expenses, and that system
allocated indirect costs as intended.


-----

_Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, a Managed Care Organization_

_SAO Report No. 21-025_

##### Summary of Management’s Response

At the end of certain chapters in this report, auditors made recommendations to
address the issues identified during this audit. The Health Plan and Commission
agreed to implement the recommendations; however, the Health Plan disagreed
with the audit findings related to its Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s process to
require a pharmacy provider to return funds as part of an effective rate contract.
Although the Health Plan and its Pharmacy Benefit Manager had multiple
opportunities to address these issues during the audit, auditors were repeatedly
denied access to the Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s complete analysis of pharmacy
claims. Instead, the Pharmacy Benefit Manager provided summary documentation,
which contained numerous redactions and presented the calculation in two groups.

The Health Plan also attempts to diminish the significance of the potential impact
of the process to require pharmacies to pay back funds after claims have been
finalized. Whether the Pharmacy Benefit Manager aggregates its Medicaid claims
with other programs or shares any returned funds with the Health Plan does not
alter the Health Plan’s obligation to report the final amount retained by
pharmacies for ingredient and dispensing costs in its FSRs and encounter data.

After review and consideration of the management responses, the State Auditor’s
Office stands by its conclusions based on evidence provided during this audit.

##### Audit Objective and Scope

The objective of this audit was to determine whether selected financial processes
and related controls at selected Medicaid managed care organizations are designed
and operating to help ensure (1) the accuracy and completeness of data that MCOs
report to the Commission and (2) compliance with applicable requirements.

The scope of this audit covered the Health Plan’s financial processes and related
controls for fiscal year 2018 data reported to the Commission. Specifically, it
included the Health Plan’s STAR Kids, Administrative Expense, and Quality
Improvement FSRs; its reported medical and pharmacy claims; and related,
significant internal control components (see Appendix 3 for more information
about internal control components). In addition, the scope of this audit included
the Commission’s oversight of effective rate contracts between pharmacy benefit
managers and pharmacy providers.


-----

## Contents

###### Detailed Results

Chapter 1
The Health Plan’s $26.4 Million in Reported Pharmacy
Expenses Did Not Reflect the Final Amount Paid to
Pharmacies, and It Should Strengthen Its Reporting of
Claims for Certain Drug Types ....................................... 1

Chapter 2
The Health Plan Accurately Reported Its STAR Kids
Medical Expenses .................................................... 13

Chapter 3
The Health Plan Accurately Reported Administrative and
Quality Improvement Expenses .................................... 14

###### Appendices

Appendix 1
Objective, Scope, and Methodology .............................. 15

Appendix 2
Issue Rating Classifications and Descriptions .................... 19

Appendix 3
Internal Control Components ...................................... 20

Appendix 4
Blue Cross Blue Shield Service Delivery Areas for STAR
Kids .................................................................... 22

Appendix 5
Calculation of Experience Rebates ............................... 23

Appendix 6
Calculation of the Fiscal Year 2018 Experience Rebate
for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas ............................... 24

Appendix 7
Related State Auditor’s Office Reports .......................... 25


-----

## Detailed Results

_Chapter 1_
###### The Health Plan’s $26.4 Million in Reported Pharmacy Expenses Did Not Reflect the Final Amount Paid to Pharmacies, and It Should Strengthen Its Reporting of Claims for Certain Drug Types

The $26.4 million in pharmacy expenses that Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas
(Health Plan) reported in its fiscal year 2018 financial statistical report (FSR)
did not reflect the final amount paid to pharmacies. Specifically, the amount
reported did not include the impact of any funds a pharmacy provider
returned to the Pharmacy Benefit Manager as the result of a year-end
aggregation process[1]. The amount returned is referred to as the
“reconciliation amount” in the contract between the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager and the pharmacy. In addition:

         According to the Health and Human Services Commission (Commission),
(1) the analysis the Pharmacy Benefit Manager used to calculate the
returned funds is an unallowable practice because that analysis
aggregated Medicaid claims with claims from non-Medicaid programs
and (2) collecting funds post payment from pharmacy providers as a
result of that analysis is unallowable.

         The requirement to return funds resulted from the payment
methodology established in the contract between the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager and the pharmacy provider. However, that contract type
established an “effective rate” pricing methodology and does not comply
with the Pharmacy Benefit Manager requirements in the Commission’s
contract with the Health Plan.

The Health Plan complied with eligibility requirements for pharmacy claims;
however, it should strengthen its processes for reporting claims for certain
drug types.

1 For purposes of this report, “returned funds” refers to the funds the pharmacy was required to return to the Pharmacy Benefit

Manager as a result of the year end aggregation process established in an “effective rate” contract.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

Chapter 1-A
**The Health Plan’s $26.4 Million in Reported Pharmacy Expenses**
**Did Not Reflect the Final Amount Paid to**
**Pharmacies**


**Encounter Data**

MCOs are required to submit
encounter data to the
Commission on a monthly basis.
The data contains detailed
member, provider, procedure,
and payment information for
services provided to Medicaid
clients. Encounter data is a key
source of claims expense
information used to set the
premiums paid to MCOs.

Source: The Commission.


**Chapter 1-A**

**Rating:**

Priority [2]


The Health Plan reported $26.4 million in
pharmacy expenses in its fiscal year 2018 FSRs;
that amount represents what was initially paid to
pharmacy providers. However, it did not include
the effect of funds it recovered from one pharmacy
tested. The Health Plan’s encounter data (see text
box), which represents individual claims, also did
not include the effect of the returned funds. The
net effect of any returned funds on the reported
amounts and encounter data could not be
determined based on the documentation provided.


Figure 1 shows the process for STAR Kids pharmacy expenses.

Figure 1

Sources: Information from the Commission, the Health Plan, and PBM.

2 The risk related to the issues discussed in Chapter 1 is rated as Priority because they present risks or effects that if not

addressed could critically affect to the agency’s ability to effectively administer the program/function audited. Immediate
action is required to address the noted concern and reduce risks to the organization.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Pharmacy Benefit Manager**

MCOs are required to contract with
pharmacy benefit managers to
process prescription claims.
Pharmacy benefit managers
contract with pharmacies that
dispense medications to Medicaid
managed care members.


Specifically, for one contract tested, the Health Plan’s affiliate
Pharmacy Benefit Manager (see text box), which is partially owned
by the Health Plan[3], conducted a year-end analysis of payments to
the pharmacy provider. Based on that analysis, the Pharmacy Benefit
Manager calculated a return of funds (referred to as “reconciliation
amount” in the contract tested) by the pharmacy provider totaling
$8.2 million for both Medicaid and non-Medicaid programs.


Source: The Commission’s STAR
Kids Managed Care Contract.

In its analysis, the Pharmacy Benefit Manager combined multiple
lines of business and did not identify what portion of the calculated
return of funds were related to STAR Kids or its other Medicaid
programs (see Figure 2). As a result, auditors could not determine the validity
of the analysis or the impact on what the Health Plan reported in its FSRs and
encounter data.


Figure 2

Sources: Information from the Commission, the Health Plan, and the Pharmacy Benefit Manager.

3 According to information submitted to the Commission for fiscal year 2018, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas’ parent company,

Health Care Services Corporation, owns 42% of the Health Plan’s Pharmacy Benefit Manager. In addition, 78% of the
Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s revenue is generated from affiliated sources.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

According to the Commission, aggregating Medicaid claims with claims from
non-Medicaid programs and requiring pharmacy providers to return funds
based on that aggregation are unallowable practices. While the $26.4 million
represents what was initially paid to pharmacy providers, it does not reflect
the final amount retained by pharmacies because any return of funds
effectively reduces what the Pharmacy Benefit Manager paid for ingredient
and dispensing costs.

**Effective Rate Contracts**

The contract between the Pharmacy Benefit Manager and pharmacy
provider discussed above established an “effective rate” pricing
methodology. This type of contract does not base payments on rates set for
each individual claim/encounter. Instead, final payment is based on
aggregated claims and allows the Pharmacy Benefit Manager to require the
pharmacy provider to return funds at year end. While the Commission’s
contract with Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) allows a pharmacy
benefit manager to charge MCOs an administrative fee for providing services,
the contract prohibits “spread pricing.”

Spread pricing is when a pharmacy benefit manager charges an MCO more
for ingredient and dispensing costs than the amount a pharmacy benefit
manager pays a pharmacy (see Figure 3 on the next page). Since spread
pricing is prohibited, reporting those returned funds is not explicitly required
by the Commission’s contract with the Health Plan. However, effective rate
contracts may have the same impact to the State as spread pricing because
they may result in the reporting of pharmacy costs at an amount other than
the final amount retained by pharmacies for ingredient and dispensing costs.

The effective rate methodology reduces price transparency and makes it
more difficult to validate what a pharmacy was ultimately paid for an
individual Texas Medicaid claim/encounter.

Figure 3 on the next page illustrates the effect of spread pricing and the
return of funds discussed above; it does not represent any actual amounts
for the Health Plan.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

Figure 3

Sources: Based on information from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General; the Health Plan;
and the Pharmacy Benefit Manager.

According to the Health Plan’s Pharmacy Benefit Manager, it has effective
rate contracts with other pharmacy providers in addition to the one tested. If
MCOs increase the use of this type of contract, the potential effect on the
accuracy of the reported pharmacy expenses in the FSRs and encounter data
would be significantly increased. Any inaccuracies may impact the State’s
long-term Medicaid costs because the Commission uses that reported
information to set the monthly amount that MCOs are paid per member
(known as the premium or capitation rate). In addition, the Commission uses
those expenses to calculate whether the Health Plan must pay an experience
rebate[4] under the profit sharing requirements (see Appendix 5 for more
information about experience rebates).

4 “Experience rebates” are a portion of a managed care organization’s net income before taxes that is returned to the State in

accordance with statute and the uniform managed care contract terms.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Recommendations**

The Health Plan should:

Work with the Commission to ensure that its Pharmacy Benefit
Manager’s practices are in compliance with the STAR Kids contract.

Report pharmacy expenses based on the final amount paid to pharmacy
providers.

The Commission should monitor MCOs to verify:

Compliance with its prohibition of spread pricing.

Reported pharmacy expenses represent the final amount retained by
pharmacies for dispensing and ingredient costs.

**Management’s Response from the Health Plan**

_The Health Plan agrees with the Recommendations, with the following_
_comments:_

_Moving forward, BCBSTX will report annual Reconciliation Amounts received_
_or paid by the PBM attributable to Texas Medicaid, regardless of whether_
_BCBSTX receives payment. Please note that the PBM’s contract with the_
_pharmacy in question no longer includes a provision for payment by the_
_pharmacy to the PBM of any Reconciliation Amount._

_The Health Plan respectfully disagrees with the finding, for the following_
_reasons:_

_As an initial matter, BCBSTX notes that the $8,200,000 Reconciliation Amount_
_reported on page 2 and in Figures 2 and 3 of the Draft Report is incorrect, and_
_respectfully requests that the references be amended to reflect the actual_
_Reconciliation Amount paid by the pharmacy to the PBM of $4,147,419. A_
_payment remittance was provided to the auditors on April 15, 2021 that_
_reflects the year end Reconciliation Amount. The auditors lifted the_
_$8,200,000 figure from a data point in the Reconciliation Amount calculation_
_from a certain point in time during the Reconciliation Process, but it does not_
_represent the final Reconciliation Amount that was ultimately remitted to the_
_PBM. The report’s use of the $8,200,000 figure is incorrect, as it is nearly_
_double the actual Reconciliation Amount paid by the pharmacy to the PBM._

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**_Effective Rate Contract and the Accuracy of the FSR_**

_The finding attempts to equate the effective rate contract in place between_
_the PBM and pharmacy during the audit period with spread pricing; however,_
_these are not the same and the contract’s Reconciliation Process does not_
_violate the terms of the Uniform Managed Care Contract (UMCC). As_
_demonstrated by this audit and required by the UMCC, BCBSTX was invoiced_
_by its PBM at that same rate (ingredient cost plus dispensing fee) the_
_pharmacy was paid. This is true regardless of whether the PBM’s contract_
_with the pharmacy utilized an effective rate pricing model._

_As illustrated by the State Auditor’s Office in Figure 3, under a prohibited_
_spread pricing arrangement each claim would generate a mark-up (spread)_
_that would be paid by the MCO. The mark-up is a PBM’s margin on the claim._

_Effective rate contracts, however, are distinct from spread pricing_
_arrangements and not prohibited by the UMCC. Effective rate contracts allow_
_the PBM to leverage its scale while managing to the needs of various plans_
_(of various sizes and parameters) while also providing a pricing safeguard for_
_the pharmacy. The goal is to ensure the pharmacy is paid, in aggregate_
_across all of a PBM’s clients, at the contracted effective rate for the_
_applicable network. It does not contemplate built-in margin and is not_
_intended to set the rate for specific plan performance or specific claims. This_
_is why the PBM’s receipt of a Reconciliation Amount does not result in an_
_adjustment to the claim. In the same way, an over performance (amount_
_owed to the pharmacy based on the annual Reconciliation Process) would not_
_result in an invoice to the MCO or HHSC._

_Additionally, the State Auditor’s Office illustration in Figure 3 implies that the_
_spread retained by the PBM in a spread pricing arrangement and the_
_Reconciliation Amount received by the PBM has the same impact on the State_
_Medicaid program. That is not accurate. Using the illustration provided as an_
_example, the $2,000,000 generated in a spread pricing arrangement is_
_directly attributable to the excess amount paid by the MCO on the_
_prescription drug claims for Texas Medicaid claims. Conversely, if the_
_$2,000,000 were returned to the PBM under an effective rate contract, it_
_would not be directly tied to Texas Medicaid claims. In fact, Texas Medicaid_
_represents only 0.13% of the business subject to the Reconciliation Process._
_For the illustration in Figure 3 to be accurate, the $2M Reconciliation Amount_
_needs to be reduced to $2,600 (0.13% of $2M). The below illustrates the_
_percentage of Texas Medicaid claims compared to all other claims included in_
_the Reconciliation Process._

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Consistent with the above, the pharmacy expenses reported in the 2018 FSR_
_reflect the actual amount billed by the PBM to BCBSTX, as required by the_
_UMCC, which states that “the MCO’s reimbursement methodology for the_
_PBM must be based on the actual paid amount by the PBM to a pharmacy for_
_dispensing and ingredient costs.” The PBM bills BCBSTX the payment amount_
_that is due to the pharmacy for dispensing and ingredient costs. The claims_
_detail provided during the audit demonstrates that BCBSTX paid the PBM the_
_ingredient cost and dispensing fee that the PBM had paid to the pharmacy for_
_the prescription drug claims._

_Receipt of a Reconciliation Amount by the PBM from the pharmacy does not_
_support a conclusion that the FSR is inaccurate or “overstated,” particularly_
_because the PBM did not pay to BCBSTX any amount of the Reconciliation_
_Amount received. As explained above, had a Reconciliation Payment gone the_
_other way and resulted in a payment by the PBM to the pharmacy, the PBM_
_would not have invoiced BCBSTX for the remitted amount and an adjustment_
_to the FSR would not have occurred. Had a payment been made to BCBSTX by_
_the PBM, current processes would ensure that the amount would be recorded_
_in the general ledger, with a portion allocated to Texas Medicaid, and the_
_amount would be reported on the FSR. As such, the 2018 FSR accurately_
_reflects the pharmacy expenses incurred by BCBSTX for the year under review._

_While the Reconciliation Amount resulted in a payment from the pharmacy to_
_the PBM, it does not support the conclusion that Texas Medicaid claims over-_
_performed for the year. As noted in the Draft Report, the Reconciliation_

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Amount is an aggregate calculation of claims across all lines of business. As_
_noted above, Texas Medicaid represents only 0.13% of the business subject to_
_the Reconciliation Process. If it is determined that the Reconciliation Amount_
_is reportable, then the pro rata portion of the Reconciliation Amount received_
_by the PBM that would have been allocated to Texas Medicaid is $5,391.65_
_(0.13% of $4,147,419)._

_Please note, as mentioned above, the PBM’s contract with the pharmacy in_
_question no longer includes a provision for payment by the pharmacy to the_
_PBM of any Reconciliation Amount._

**Auditor Follow-up Comment**

The information presented in Chapter 1-A is based on the documentation
provided by the Health Plan and its Pharmacy Benefit Manager. Despite
numerous requests, auditors were repeatedly denied access to the Pharmacy
Benefit Manager’s complete analysis of pharmacy claims. Instead, the
Pharmacy Benefit Manager provided summary documentation, which
contained numerous redactions and presented the calculation in two groups.
For the group that included Texas Medicaid, that analysis showed the
pharmacy owed the Pharmacy Benefit Manager $8.2 million. Neither the
Health Plan nor the Pharmacy Benefit Manager provided documentation to
support the final amount the pharmacy paid back for Medicaid claims or to
support the Health Plan’s assertion that Medicaid accounted for 0.13% of the
final amount of returned funds.

Whether the Pharmacy Benefit Manager aggregates its Medicaid claims with
other programs or shares its funds returned with the Health Plan does not
alter the Health Plan’s obligation to report the final amount retained by
pharmacies for ingredient and dispensing costs in its FSRs and encounter
data. If the final amount retained by pharmacies is less than the amount
MCOs reimburse the Pharmacy Benefit Manager for claims, pharmacy
expenses will be overstated and it will have the same effect as spread pricing
as Figure 3 demonstrates.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Management’s Response from the Commission**

_Statement of Agreement/Disagreement_

_MCS currently monitors MCOs to verify compliance with the prohibition of_
_spread pricing. MCS agrees to enhance monitoring to verify that reported_
_pharmacy expenses represent the final amount retained by pharmacies for_
_dispensing and ingredient costs._

_Action Plan_

_Currently, to address the prohibited practice of spread pricing, MCS reconciles_
_reported pharmacy expenses and expenses reported through encounters._
_Additionally, through the annual agreed-upon procedures (AUP)_
_engagements, HHSC's contract auditors validate that the amounts pharmacy_
_benefit managers (PBMs) pay the pharmacies match the amounts MCOs_
_record on financial statements submitted to HHSC. HHSC also reviews_
_encounters during the capitation rate setting process to identify whether_
_spread pricing has occurred._

_In May 2021, MCS began a targeted review of each MCO/PBM’s Network_
_Agreements with pharmacy providers to ensure any prohibited language is_
_removed from all agreements and new approved agreements are executed_
_timely. The submission, review, and network agreement re-execution process_
_will be completed by August 31, 2022._

_If MCS identifies non-compliance on the part of any MCO, MCS will consider_
_conducting a targeted financial audit of the MCO. MCS will determine_
_appropriate remedies and work with the MCO on any necessary corrective_
_action._

_MCS will create a new deliverable in the Uniform Managed Care Manual to_
_require submission of pharmacy network agreements to HHSC in the future._

_Responsible Manager(s)_

_Deputy Associate Commissioner, MCS Operations_

_Target Implementation Date_

_August 31, 2022_

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Chapter 1-B**

**Rating:**

Medium [5]


Chapter 1-B
**The Health Plan Paid Pharmacy Claims for Eligible Members Only;**
**However, It Should Strengthen Its Reporting of Claims for Certain**
**Drug Types**

The Health Plan complied with eligibility requirements for pharmacy claims;
however, it should strengthen its processes for reporting claims for certain
drug types.

**Claims tested. The Health Plan accurately reported 26 (93 percent) of 28 claims**
tested, and those claims were paid in accordance with the contracts. The
Health Plan could not demonstrate whether the 2 (7 percent) remaining
claims tested were paid in accordance with the contract due to the issues
discussed in Chapter 1-A.

**Eligibility. The Health Plan paid pharmacy claims for members whom the**
Commission determined to be eligible for the STAR Kids program. In addition,
the Health Plan paid providers who had not been excluded by either the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of Inspector General or
the Commission’s Office of Inspector General as required.

**Compound Drug Claims. The Health Plan did not report 1,297 pharmacy**
encounters for drugs that included more than one ingredient (known as
compound drugs). Those encounters totaled $132,511 and were not
reported because coding errors caused the encounter reporting system to
reject those encounters. The Health Plan did not work with the Commission
to correct the errors and resubmit the claims.

**Recommendation**

The Health Plan should develop, document, and implement a process to
review rejected encounters, correct coding errors, and resubmit rejected
encounters to the Commission.


5 The risk related to the issues discussed in Chapter 1 is rated as Medium because they present risks or effects that if not

addressed could moderately affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer program(s)/function(s) audited.
Action is needed to address the noted concern and reduce risks to a more desirable level.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Management’s Response from the Health Plan**

_BCBSTX agrees with the Recommendation, with the following comments:_

_A correction was implemented to facilitate reporting of and remediate coding_
_errors that caused the rejection of compound claims. After implementation,_
_no further rejections resulted for this reason for the remainder of the year._
_The overall encounter acceptance rate in 2018 was approximately 99%. The_
_rejected encounters will be resubmitted to the Commission promptly._

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Chapter 2_
###### The Health Plan Accurately Reported Its STAR Kids Medical Expenses


**Chapter 2**

**Rating:**

Low [6]


The Health Plan accurately reported its STAR Kids medical (fee-for-service)
expenses, totaling $109.1 million, on its fiscal year 2018 FSRs and in its
encounter data submitted to the Commission. Specifically, information in the
claims processing system that the Health Plan used supported the reported
medical expenses. The medical expenses reported on the FSRs were also
supported by the encounter data submitted to the Commission. For a sample
of 65 claims tested, totaling $1.1 million, the Health Plan accurately reported
key fields in the encounter data.

The Health Plan also paid medical claims for eligible members and to
providers who had not been excluded by either the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services’ Office of Inspector General or the Commission’s
Office of Inspector General as required. In addition, for 61 (94 percent) of 65
claims tested, the Health Plan accurately paid its providers.


6 The risk related to the issues discussed in Chapter 2 is rated as Low because the audit identified strengths that support the

audited entity’s ability to administer the program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do not present significant
risks or effects that would negatively affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s)
audited.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Chapter 3_
###### The Health Plan Accurately Reported Administrative and Quality Improvement Expenses 


**Chapter 3**

**Rating:**

Low [7]


The Health Plan accurately reported
administrative and quality improvement[8]
expenses totaling $49.1 million in its fiscal year
2018 FSRs. Information in the Health Plan’s
accounting system supported the reported
expenses, and that system allocated indirect
costs as intended (see text box for more
information on direct and indirect costs).

**Administrative and Quality Improvement Expenses. Of**
65 expenses tested, 59 (91 percent) were
allowable and supported (see text box for more
information on allowable costs).

**Affiliate Contract. The Health Plan’s contracted**
payment rates for its affiliate contract for
outsourced administrative services did not
exceed fair market value for the STAR Kids
program for fiscal year 2018. The cost principles
in the Commission’s Uniform Managed Care
_Manual require health plans to report_
outsourced administrative services at either (1)
the cost to the affiliate providing the service or
(2) fair market value of the services provided.

**Compensation Expenses. The Health Plan’s**
compensation expenses reported on its
administrative and quality improvement FSRs
complied with the Commission’s requirements.
Specifically, the compensation expenses
reported on the Health Plan’s fiscal year 2018
FSR were supported by the Health Plan’s
accounting system. In addition, all 25 payroll
expenses tested were allowable and supported.


**Direct and Indirect Costs**

The Commission’s Uniform Managed
_Care Manual defines direct costs as_
those that can be identified
specifically with and are readily
assignable to the objectives of the
Commission’s contract with the
MCO.

**Indirect costs are those incurred for**
a common or joint purpose
benefiting the contract and one or
more other activities of the MCO and
are not readily assignable to the
activities specifically benefited.
Indirect costs may be assessed or
allocated by a parent or affiliate of
the MCO and are allowable only to
the extent that: (1) the costs clearly
represent specifically identified
operating services provided for the
operating subsidiary; and (2) the
services directly benefit the
Commission or its Medicaid or
Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP) Members.

Source: The Commission.


**Allowable Costs**

The Commission’s Uniform Managed
_Care Manual defines the cost_
principles that establish the
allowability of expenses related to
selected Medicaid programs that an
MCO can report on its FSR.

A designation of “allowable” or
“unallowable” does not generally
govern whether the MCO can incur a
cost or make a payment;
allowability reflects only what is
reportable on the FSR.

To be allowable, expenses must
conform to the requirements of the
Commission’s cost principles, which
include being reasonable, allocable,
and reported as they are incurred.

Source: The Commission.


7 The risk related to the issues discussed in Chapter 3 is rated as Low because the audit identified strengths that support the

audited entity’s ability to administer the program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do not present significant
risks or effects that would negatively affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s)
audited.

8 Quality improvement expenses are administrative-type costs related to activities that improve health quality and health

outcomes.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

## Appendices

_Appendix 1_
###### Objective, Scope, and Methodology 

**Objective**

The objective of this audit was to determine whether selected financial
processes and related controls at selected Medicaid managed care
organizations (MCOs) are designed and operating to help ensure (1) the
accuracy and completeness of data that MCOs report to the Health and
Human Services Commission (Commission) and (2) compliance with
applicable requirements.

**Scope**

The scope of this audit covered Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (Health Plan)
financial processes and related controls for fiscal year 2018 data reported to
the Commission. Specifically, it included the Health Plan’s STAR Kids,
Administrative Expense, and Quality Improvement financial statistical reports
(FSRs); its reported medical and pharmacy claims; and related, significant
internal control components (see Appendix 3 for more information about
internal control components). In addition, the scope of this audit included
the Commission’s oversight of effective rate contracts between pharmacy
benefit managers and pharmacy providers.

**Methodology**

The audit methodology included conducting interviews with Health Plan
management and staff; reviewing the Health Plan’s managed care contract
and policies and procedures; collecting, reviewing, and analyzing the Health
Plan’s FSRs and supporting claims and financial data; and performing
selected tests and other procedures.

**Data Reliability and Completeness**

Auditors reviewed multiple data sets to assess the reliability of the Health
Plan’s FSRs, including medical claims data, pharmacy claims data, encounter
data, capitation data, accounting data, and payroll data. Auditors reconciled
the FSRs to those data sets and performed procedures to assess the
reliability of those data sets including (1) observing data extracts,
(2) reviewing query parameters used to extract the data, and (3) comparing
the data to system report totals.

Auditors determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes
of this audit.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

**Sampling Methodology**

Auditors selected nonstatistical samples of medical claims, prescription
claims, employee payroll transactions, and administrative and quality
improvement expense transactions primarily through random selection. In
some cases, auditors selected additional transactions for testing based on
risk. This sampling design was chosen to ensure the sample included a cross
section of expenses and the highest-dollar transactions.

For administrative and quality improvement expenses, the population
obtained from the Health Plan included indirect expenses. Those expenses
were allocated across multiple programs, and only a portion of each expense
was attributable to Texas Medicaid[9]. The pre-allocated payroll expenses
totaled $239.6 million; auditors sampled $65,142. For the largest five nonpayroll accounts, the pre-allocated administrative and quality improvement
expenses totaled $655.8 million; auditors sampled $11.9 million.

The test results as reported do not identify which items were randomly
selected or selected using professional judgment; therefore, it would not be
appropriate to project the test results to the population.

Information collected and reviewed included the following:

         The Commission’s STAR Kids contract with the Health Plan.

         The Commission’s STAR Kids member eligibility records for the Health
Plan.

         The Health Plan’s medical claims and prescription claims data.

         The Health Plan’s contracts with selected medical providers.

         The Health Plan’s policies and procedures.

         The Health Plan’s 334-day STAR Kids, administrative expense, and quality
improvement FSRs for fiscal year 2018.

         The Health Plan’s adjustments to its administrative expense and quality
improvement FSRs for fiscal year 2018.

         The Health Plan’s accounting and payroll data and supporting
documentation.

9 Of the total pre-allocated administrative and quality improvement expenses, the Health Plan allocated $49.1 million to Texas

Medicaid in its 2018 FSR (see Chapter 3).

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

The Health Plan’s supporting documentation for calculating reported
allocated costs for fiscal year 2018.

The Health Plan’s Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s contracts with selected
pharmacy providers.

Procedures and tests conducted included the following:

Reconciled medical expenses, administrative expenses, and quality
improvement costs in the Health Plan’s FSRs for fiscal year 2018 to the
claims system and general ledger.

Reconciled prescription expenses in the Health Plan’s FSRs for fiscal year
2018 to the Health Plan’s Pharmacy Benefit Manager’s claims system.

Performed data analysis to determine whether the Health Plan and its
Pharmacy Benefit Manager paid medical and prescription claims only for
eligible STAR Kids members.

Performed data analysis to determine whether the Health Plan and its
Pharmacy Benefit Manager did not pay medical and prescription claims
to providers excluded from the Medicaid program.

Tested medical and pharmacy claims to determine whether the Health
Plan and its Pharmacy Benefit Manager accurately paid providers for
expenses reported in its FSRs.

Reconciled the FSRs’ supporting worksheets to the underlying source
data.

Tested administrative expenses, including payroll costs, to determine
whether amounts reported were allowable, appropriate, and adequately
supported.

Performed data analysis on general ledger data, payroll data, and other
underlying source data for accuracy and allowability.

Reviewed the Health Plan’s allocation methodology to determine
whether it was accurate, reasonable, and supported.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

Criteria used included the following:

Title 41, United States Code, Sections 1127 and 4304.

Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200.

Title 48, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 31.

Title 1, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 353.

The Commission’s STAR Kids Contract.

The Commission’s Uniform Managed Care Manual.

The Health Plan’s policies and procedures.

**Project Information**

Audit fieldwork was conducted from July 2020 through May 2021. We
conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.

The following members of the State Auditor’s staff performed the audit:

Scott Labbe, CPA (Project Manager)

Stacey Williams, CGAP (Assistant Project Manager)

Arnton W. Gray, CPA, CIA

Derek Lopez, MBA

Sarah Jane M. Puerto, CIA, CFE, CGAP

Adam Ryan

Kiara White, MPP, CFE

Dana Musgrave, MBA (Quality Control Reviewer)

Lauren Godfrey, CIA, CGAP (Audit Manager)

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Appendix 2_
###### Issue Rating Classifications and Descriptions

Auditors used professional judgment and rated the audit findings identified
in this report. Those issue ratings are summarized in the report
chapters/sub-chapters. The issue ratings were determined based on the
degree of risk or effect of the findings in relation to the audit objective(s).

In determining the ratings of audit findings, auditors considered factors such
as financial impact; potential failure to meet program/function objectives;
noncompliance with state statute(s), rules, regulations, and other
requirements or criteria; and the inadequacy of the design and/or operating
effectiveness of internal controls. In addition, evidence of potential fraud,
waste, or abuse; significant control environment issues; and little to no
corrective action for issues previously identified could increase the ratings for
audit findings. Auditors also identified and considered other factors when
appropriate.

Table 2 provides a description of the issue ratings presented in this report.

Table 2

**Summary of Issue Ratings**

**Issue Rating** **Description of Rating**

Low The audit identified strengths that support the audited entity’s ability to
administer the program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do
not present significant risks or effects that would negatively affect the
audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the
program(s)/function(s) audited.

Medium Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could
moderately affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer
the program(s)/function(s) audited. Action is needed to address the
noted concern(s) and reduce risks to a more desirable level.

High Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could
substantially affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer
the program(s)/function(s) audited. Prompt action is essential to address
the noted concern(s) and reduce risks to the audited entity.

**Priority** Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could
critically affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the
program(s)/function(s) audited. Immediate action is required to address
the noted concern(s) and reduce risks to the audited entity.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization

|Summary of Issue Ratings|Col2|
|---|---|
|Issue Rating|Description of Rating|
|Low|The audit identified strengths that support the audited entity’s ability to administer the program(s)/function(s) audited or the issues identified do not present significant risks or effects that would negatively affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited.|
|Medium|Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could moderately affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Action is needed to address the noted concern(s) and reduce risks to a more desirable level.|
|High|Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could substantially affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Prompt action is essential to address the noted concern(s) and reduce risks to the audited entity.|
|Priority|Issues identified present risks or effects that if not addressed could critically affect the audited entity’s ability to effectively administer the program(s)/function(s) audited. Immediate action is required to address the noted concern(s) and reduce risks to the audited entity.|


-----

_Appendix 3_
###### Internal Control Components

Internal control is a process used by management to help an entity achieve
its objectives. The U.S. Government Accountability Office’s Government
_Auditing Standards require auditors to assess internal control when internal_
control is significant to the audit objectives. The Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) established a framework
for 5 integrated components and 17 principles of internal control, which are
listed in Table 3.

Table 3

**Internal Control Components and Principles**

**Component** **Component Description** **Principles**

                                   
Control Environment The control environment sets the The organization demonstrates a commitment to
tone of an organization, influencing integrity and ethical values.
the control consciousness of its                     
The board of directors demonstrates independence

people. It is the foundation for all

from management and exercises oversight of the

other components of internal

development and performance of internal control.

control, providing discipline and                     structure. Management establishes, with board oversight,

structures, reporting lines, and appropriate
authorities and responsibilities in the pursuit of
objectives.

                                   The organization demonstrates a commitment to

attract, develop, and retain competent individuals
in alignment with objectives.

                                   The organization holds individuals accountable for

their internal control responsibilities in the pursuit
of objectives.

                                   
Risk Assessment Risk assessment is the entity’s The organization specifies objectives with sufficient
identification and analysis of risks clarity to enable the identification and assessment
relevant to achievement of its of risks relating to objectives.
objectives, forming a basis for                     
The organization identifies risks to the achievement

determining how the risks should be

of its objectives across the entity and analyzes risks

managed.

as a basis for determining how the risks should be
managed.

                                   The organization considers the potential for fraud in

assessing risks to the achievement of objectives.

                                   The organization identifies and assesses changes

that could significantly impact the system of internal
control.

                                   
Control Activities Control activities are the policies The organization selects and develops control
and procedures that help ensure activities that contribute to the mitigation of risks to
that management’s directives are the achievement of objectives to acceptable levels.
carried out.                     
The organization selects and develops general

control activities over technology to support the
achievement of objectives.

                                   The organization deploys control activities through

policies that establish what is expected and
procedures that put policies into action.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization

|Internal Control Components and Principles|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Component|Component Description|Principles|
| Control Environment The control environment sets the The organization demonstrates a commitment to tone of an organization, influencing integrity and ethical values. the control consciousness of its  The board of directors demonstrates independence people. It is the foundation for all from management and exercises oversight of the other components of internal development and performance of internal control. control, providing discipline and  structure. Management establishes, with board oversight, structures, reporting lines, and appropriate authorities and responsibilities in the pursuit of objectives.  The organization demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop, and retain competent individuals in alignment with objectives.  The organization holds individuals accountable for their internal control responsibilities in the pursuit of objectives.  Risk Assessment Risk assessment is the entity’s The organization specifies objectives with sufficient identification and analysis of risks clarity to enable the identification and assessment relevant to achievement of its of risks relating to objectives. objectives, forming a basis for  The organization identifies risks to the achievement determining how the risks should be of its objectives across the entity and analyzes risks managed. as a basis for determining how the risks should be managed.  The organization considers the potential for fraud in assessing risks to the achievement of objectives.  The organization identifies and assesses changes that could significantly impact the system of internal control.  Control Activities Control activities are the policies The organization selects and develops control and procedures that help ensure activities that contribute to the mitigation of risks to that management’s directives are the achievement of objectives to acceptable levels. carried out.  The organization selects and develops general control activities over technology to support the achievement of objectives.  The organization deploys control activities through policies that establish what is expected and procedures that put policies into action.|||


-----

|Internal Control Components and Principles|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Component|Component Description|Principles|
| Information and Information and communication are The organization obtains or generates and uses Communication the identification, capture, and relevant, quality information to support the exchange of information in a form functioning of internal control. and time frame that enable people  The organization internally communicates to carry out their responsibilities. information, including objectives and responsibilities for internal control, necessary to support the functioning of internal control.  The organization communicates with external parties regarding matters affecting the functioning of internal control.  Monitoring Activities Monitoring is a process that assesses The organization selects, develops, and performs the quality of internal control ongoing and/or separate evaluations to ascertain performance over time. whether the components of internal control are present and functioning.  The organization evaluates and communicates internal control deficiencies in a timely manner to those parties responsible for taking corrective action, including senior management and the board of directors, as appropriate.|||


Source: Internal Control – Integrated Framework, Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, May
2013.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Appendix 4_
###### Blue Cross Blue Shield Service Delivery Areas for STAR Kids

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas (Health Plan) provides the Medicaid STAR Kids
program to two service delivery areas: Travis County and Medicaid Rural
Service Area (MRSA) – Central.

Figure 4 is a regional map that shows the location of all the managed care
service delivery areas, including the Health Plan’s service delivery areas, as of
May 1, 2018.

Figure 4

#### Managed Care Service Delivery Areas in Texas 
 As of May 1, 2018

Source: Map was obtained from the Health and Human Services Commission.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Appendix 5_
###### Calculation of Experience Rebates

Texas Government Code, Section 533.014, requires the Health and Human
Services Commission (Commission) to adopt rules that ensure that managed
care organizations (MCOs) share profits they earn through the Medicaid
managed care program. Title 1, Texas Administrative Code, Section 353.3,
states that each MCO participating in Medicaid managed care must pay to
the State an experience rebate calculated according to the graduated rebate
method described in the MCO’s contract with the Commission. The
Commission has incorporated profit-sharing provisions into its contracts with
MCOs that require MCOs to share certain percentages of their net income
before taxes with the Commission. The General Appropriations Act (85th
Legislature), Rider 164, page II-91, requires that experience rebates the
Commission receives from MCOs be spent on funding services for Medicaid.

According to the Commission’s contracts with MCOs, a MCO must pay an
experience rebate to the Commission if the MCO’s net income before taxes
exceeds a certain percentage, defined by the Commission, of the total
revenue the MCO receives each fiscal period. The experience rebate is
calculated in accordance with a tiered rebate method that the Commission
defines (see Table 4). The tiers are based on the consolidated net income
before taxes for all of the MCO’s Medicaid program and Children’s Health
Insurance Program service areas that are included in the scope of the
contract, as reported on the MCO’s financial statistical reports, which the
Commission reviews and confirms through annual agreed-upon procedures
engagements performed by its contracted audit firms.

Table 4

**Tiers for Experience Rebates**

**Pre-tax Income as a Percent of Revenues** **MCO Share** **The Commission’s Share**

Less than or Equal to 3 percent 100 percent 0 percent

Greater than 3 percent and Less than or Equal 80 percent 20 percent
to 5 percent

Greater than 5 percent and Less than or Equal 60 percent 40 percent
to 7 percent

Greater than 7 percent and Less than or Equal 40 percent 60 percent
to 9 percent

Greater than 9 percent and Less than or Equal 20 percent 80 percent
to 12 percent

Greater than 12 percent 0 percent 100 percent

Source: The Commission’s STAR Kids Contract Terms and Conditions.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization

|Tiers for Experience Rebates|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Pre-tax Income as a Percent of Revenues|MCO Share|The Commission’s Share|
|Less than or Equal to 3 percent 100 percent 0 percent Greater than 3 percent and Less than or Equal 80 percent 20 percent to 5 percent Greater than 5 percent and Less than or Equal 60 percent 40 percent to 7 percent Greater than 7 percent and Less than or Equal 40 percent 60 percent to 9 percent Greater than 9 percent and Less than or Equal 20 percent 80 percent to 12 percent Greater than 12 percent 0 percent 100 percent|||


-----

_Appendix 6_
###### Calculation of the Fiscal Year 2018 Experience Rebate for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas

Based on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas’ (Health Plan) financial statistical
reports for fiscal year 2018, Table 5 shows the adjusted income subject to
the experience rebate calculated by the Health Plan. As of April 2021, the
Health and Human Services Commission had not completed its review of that
calculation, and the calculation does not reflect the results of any audits. The
Health Plan’s calculation of adjusted income indicates that it did not owe the
Commission an experience rebate for fiscal year 2018.

Table 5


**Blue Cross Blue Shield’s Calculation of Income Subject to Experience Rebate**


**For Fiscal Year 2018**


Unaudited Pre-tax Net Income ($38,828,666)

Admin Cap (Reduction of Administrative Expenses) [a] $24,916,621

Prior Year Loss Carry Forward ($6,175,897)

Adjusted Income Subject to Experience Rebate ($20,087,942)

a The Commission’s contract with MCOs establishes an Admin Cap that limits administrative expenses
that MCOs can deduct from revenues for purposes of calculating the experience rebate. Any amount
over the Admin Cap become disallowed expenses.

Source: The Health Plan.

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization


-----

_Appendix 7_
###### Related State Auditor’s Office Reports

Table 6

**Related State Auditor’s Office Reports**

**Number** **Report Name**

20-032 _An Audit Report on Texas Children’s Health Plan, a Managed Care Organization_

20-008 _An Audit Report on the Health and Human Services Commission's_

_Use of Remedies in Managed Care Contracts_

19-025 _An Audit Report on Medicaid Managed Care Contract Processes_

_at the Health and Human Services Commission_

19-011 _An Audit Report on Amerigroup Texas, Inc. and Amerigroup Insurance Company,_

_a Managed Care Organization_

18-015 _An Audit Report on the Health and Human Services Commission’s Management of Its_

_Medicaid Managed Care Contract with Superior HealthPlan, Inc. and Superior_
_HealthPlan Network, and Superior’s Compliance with Reporting Requirements_

17-025 _An Audit Report on HealthSpring Life and Health Insurance Company, Inc.,_

_a Medicaid STAR+PLUS Managed Care Organization_

An Audit Report on Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas a Managed Care Organization

|Related State Auditor’s Office Reports|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Number|Report Name|Release Date|
|20-032 An Audit Report on Texas Children’s Health Plan, a Managed Care Organization June 2020 20-008 An Audit Report on the Health and Human Services Commission's November 2019 Use of Remedies in Managed Care Contracts 19-025 An Audit Report on Medicaid Managed Care Contract Processes January 2019 at the Health and Human Services Commission 19-011 An Audit Report on Amerigroup Texas, Inc. and Amerigroup Insurance Company, November 2018 a Managed Care Organization 18-015 An Audit Report on the Health and Human Services Commission’s Management of Its January 2018 Medicaid Managed Care Contract with Superior HealthPlan, Inc. and Superior HealthPlan Network, and Superior’s Compliance with Reporting Requirements 17-025 An Audit Report on HealthSpring Life and Health Insurance Company, Inc., February 2017 a Medicaid STAR+PLUS Managed Care Organization|||


-----

Copies of this report have been distributed to the following:

###### Legislative Audit Committee
The Honorable Dan Patrick, Lieutenant Governor, Joint Chair
The Honorable Dade Phelan, Speaker of the House, Joint Chair
The Honorable Jane Nelson, Senate Finance Committee
The Honorable Robert Nichols, Member, Texas Senate
The Honorable Greg Bonnen, House Appropriations Committee
The Honorable Morgan Meyer, House Ways and Means Committee

###### Office of the Governor
The Honorable Greg Abbott, Governor

###### Health and Human Services Commission
Ms. Cecile Young, Executive Commissioner

###### Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas
Ms. Sara Daugherty, Texas Medicaid Executive Director


-----

This document is not copyrighted. Readers may make additional copies of this report as
needed. In addition, most State Auditor’s Office reports may be downloaded from our Web
[site: www.sao.texas.gov.](http://www.sao.texas.gov/)

In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, this document may also be requested
in alternative formats. To do so, contact our report request line at (512) 936-9500 (Voice),
(512) 936-9400 (FAX), 1-800-RELAY-TX (TDD), or visit the Robert E. Johnson Building, 1501
North Congress Avenue, Suite 4.224, Austin, Texas 78701.

The State Auditor’s Office is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability in employment or in the
provision of services, programs, or activities.

[To report waste, fraud, or abuse in state government visit https://sao.fraud.texas.gov.](https://sao.fraud.texas.gov/)


-----

